---
title: "Advent of Code 2020"
date: 2020-12-27
tags: [coding]
---

:coding:

This year was the first time I've decided or even tried to participate in Advent
of Code (AoC) challenge. Since it was the first attempt I had no clue what to
expect. I haven't participated in competitive challenges ever though I've solved
some similar tasks on Hackerank or other pages. I haven't competed for time
because the every day task is opened at 7AM. Exactly the time when I prepare
breakfast for my kids, bring them to school/kindergarten and after return - need
to start work on my job (not on AoC). I decided not to stress but focus on
completeness instead and solve every problem I'm able to. Do not copy code from
libraries, do not look into solutions of other participants if I haven't solved
the task yet. Happy to say - I've managed to solve every task manually!

## Tasks

I would call 2020 AoC challenge a medium-complexity where some motivation to
complete tasks is required. Multiple tasks involves some level of string parsing
such as extract tokens and build hashmaps. This is pretty easy with languages as
`python` but might require more boilerplate code for languages as `C`.
The final problems were not as diffitult to implement as cryptic to understand.
It also demonivated me a bit in the later days as there were many other things
to do before Christmas. Below is a list of tasks with used algorithms to get a
better understanding what AoC is about.

- *Day 1* (easy): Arrays.
- *Day 2* (easy): Strings.
- *Day 3* (easy): Matrix.
- *Day 4* (easy): Regex.
- *Day 5* (easy): Bitwise operations.
- *Day 6* (easy): Arrays.
- *Day 7* (medium): Graphs.
- *Day 8* (medium): Emulator implementation basics. One of my favorite tasks.
- *Day 9* (medium): Arrays. Can't remember actually it it was easy or not so
  easy to crack.
- *Day 10* (hard): DP. This was one of two the most difficult problems and not
  only for me. I am not good at DP and it is definitelly an area where I need to
  practice.
- *Day 11* (medium): Game of life.
- *Day 12* (medium): Matrix operations.
- *Day 13* (hard): The another most difficult problem. DP. Though some people
  found a theorem and solved in that way.
- *Day 14* (medium): Bitwise operations.
- *Day 15* (easy): Hashmaps.
- *Day 16* (medium): Hashmaps, backtracking.
- *Day 17* (medium): Game of life in n-dimmension cubes. Easy to get lost in
  coordinates.
- *Day 18* (medium): Stacks. Infix evaluation. Nice problem.
- *Day 19* (medium): Recursion, regex. Another nice problem.
- *Day 20* (hard): Obvious how to solve. But a lot of space for bugs as multiple
  algorithms needs to be applied. Used algorithms: matrix rotation,
- *Day 21* (easy): Set operations, hashmaps.
  transpose, bitwise oprations, string search. Very time consuming.
- *Day 23* (medium): Linked list.
- *Day 22* (medium): Recursion, deque.
- *Day 24* (medium): Matrix or set or hashmap.
- *Day 25* (easy): Loops.

## Notes

Below are some general findings from participation in 2020 AoC.

- Programming language matters. I've picked Python but at the same time I'm
  not a pro at this language. In parallel I've started to read "Fluent Python"
  to learn using the language in a proper way. Python comes with many useful
  libraries such as `numpy`. It is excellent to work with matrices (haven't used
  the lib before). I didn't want to spend time on matrix rotation since I'm
  pretty sure I would be able to write this algorithm. So `numpy.rot90(m)` and
  similar functions were handy. Need to master `functools` and `itertools`
  packages. I haven't used those in my solutions but it would be possible to
  reduce number of lines with these things.
- Tests helps. Splitting solution into functions and testing separate functions
  helps to catch bugs. I like python because I simply can write
  `assert my_func() == 1` and validate if function behavior is correct. If I'd
  compete for time, creating functions and tests is time consuming.
- I become lazy after solving about a half of problems. Not that problems became
  harder but some of those required more time to solve. Some solutions were
  obvious theoretically and I just wasn't very motivated to put my hands in the
  dirt (e.g. *Day 20*, *Day 21*). This could be either a question of my
  motivation or just some problems were boring.
- Optimal solution is not needed very often. I've over optimized solutions when
  it was not necessary. In AoC multiple problems can be solved via brute-force
  or some small optimization of BF. For example the *Day 17* task I've
  calculated only a half of cubes, because another half is just a mirror. The
  same with hypercubes. That increased the complexity my code but as figured out
  later - it was not necessary. AoC is not such type of competition where every
  task is validated against time. Input is only one and the same. If you get the
  result with reasonable time - that is fine. Meanwhile on Hackerank you'd get
  one input, another and finally x1000 times bigger input will be fed to your
  code. If it would not complete within given time - you would not get points
  for that dataset. That is not a case in AoC.
- Code can be optimized for input. Since input data is fixed - it is possible
  optimize it for the code: pre-sort, eliminate unnecessary lines, etc. This
  approach is also possible in the code. For example if there is possibility of
  infinite recursion - setting the hard limit for the recursion instead of
  tracking visited nodes would work.
- Belonging to private leader board motivates. We had a board with 11 active
  members and dedicated chat room. It is much more fun to discuss every problem
  afterwards with a bunch of fellows and see each other succeeding. Checking
  that someone from my leader board already solved the problem pushed myself to
  solve it to. Seeing other folks are struggling gave me understanding I'm not a
  total potato who is not able to complete particular problem within half hour.
  4 of us managed to solve every problem.
- Read instructions very carefully - these are cryptic sometimes. I've wasted
  some time when missing small details in a see of sentences. E.g. on *Day 22*
  I've forwarded a full deque instead of limited size just because I've missed
  the sentence.

## Finalize

In general I liked AoC a lot. It is a very friendly challenge. Friendly in that
way that you are not being pushed to optimize every bit of problem. Also you can
catch up unsolved problems during weekend or on your own pace. Perfect for
pre-Christmas period :-)
