---
title: "XKB and keyboard layouts on Linux"
date: 2020-08-31
---

:linux:

For a while I was looking for an efficient way to deal with Lithuanian letters
and english keyboard at the same time. I have noticed that switching between
keyboard layouts with Super+Space (or any other keys combination) is not
efficient. Sometimes I even do not recognize when I switch to different layout
and start typing code. Or jump from chat to vim and instead of special symbols
lithuanian letters are written. I knew that solution should be a consistend and
one layout.

After asking few folks how they are dealing with this situation - majority of
answers (from those who answered) were using AltGr (right Alt) key to type
symbols from yet another layout. Usually standard lithuanian layout is turned on
(with letters on numbers row). And numbers a reached with AltGr+<Num>. For me,
coder, this sounded suboptimal as to type special symbols like "=" I would need
wreck my fingers trying to type three keys combination like AltGr+Shift+=.
Another option - use "US Keyboard (with Lithuanian letters)" layout also known
as "lt,us".

For some reason on Ubuntu 20.04 only "Lituanian" layout was available via UI
which is the standard one also known as "lt,lt". Custom layount can be loaded
via command line so I've tried:

```
$ setxkbmap -layout lt,lt -variant ,us
```

Typing `setxkbmap -print -verbose 10` showed the layout is loaded but it seems
Gnome overrides xkb settings at some level. Following command solved the issue:

```
$ gsettings set org.gnome.desktop.input-sources sources "[('xkb', 'lt+us'), ('xkb', 'lt+us')]"
```

Links:
- [A simple, humble, but comprehensive guide to XKB for linux](https://medium.com/@damko/a-simple-humble-but-comprehensive-guide-to-xkb-for-linux-6f1ad5e13450)
