---
title: "Knyga: Born to Run: A Hidden Tribe, Superathletes, and the Greatest Race the World Has Never Seen"
date: 2020-11-15
tags: []
---


> Months later, I’d learn that iskiate is otherwise known as chia fresca—“chilly
chia.” It’s brewed up by dissolving chia seeds in water with a little sugar and
a squirt of lime.

> Ultrarunning seemed to be an alternative universe where none of planet Earth’s
rules applied: women were stronger than men; old men were stronger than
youngsters; Stone Age guys in sandals were stronger than everybody.

> “Lesson two,” Caballo called. “Think Easy, Light, Smooth, and Fast. You start
with easy, because if that’s all you get, that’s not so bad. Then work on light.
Make it effortless, like you don’t give a shit how high the hill is or how far
you’ve got to go. When you’ve practiced that so long that you forget you’re
practicing, you work on making it smooooooth. You won’t have to worry about the
last one—you get those three, and you’ll be fast.”

> You can’t hate the Beast and expect to beat it; the only way to truly conquer
something, as every great philosopher and geneticist will tell you, is to love
it.

> In a 2008 research paper for the British Journal of Sports Medicine, Dr. Craig
Richards, a researcher at the University of Newcastle in Australia, revealed
that there are no evidence-based studies—not one—that demonstrate that running
shoes make you less prone to injury.

> The way to activate your fat-burning furnace is by staying below your aerobic
threshold—your hard-breathing point—during your endurance runs.

> We’re the only mammals that shed most of our heat by sweating. All the
pelt-covered creatures in the world cool off primarily by breathing, which locks
their entire heat-regulating system to their lungs. But humans, with our
millions of sweat glands, are the best air-cooled engine that evolution has ever
put on the market.

> If you can run six miles on a summer day then you, my friend, are a lethal
weapon in the animal kingdom. We can dump heat on the run, but animals can’t
pant while they gallop.

> You don’t stop running because you get old, the Dipsea Demon always said. You
get old because you stop running….

> In the ring, the other fighter determines how hard you’re hit, but on the
trail, your punishment is in your own hands.
